i think you know one way to state the
problem is
how do you make rapid progress without
killing everyone who disagrees with you
yeah i think the temptation the left
wing has been struggling with for all
these years including cambodia and
including many other cases say okay
well we'll take over the government take
over the military and then we're so
certain of this route to progress we're
so certain of what we have to do
steps one two and three that we'll
proceed with that and we won't allow
anyone to debate it or dissent
or report the problems with like report
just what's going wrong
you know i want afghanistan to make
progress too but do you just say i mean
look let's be blunt a significant
percentage of the
afghan people still support the taliban
are you going to say that the progress
and modernization
of afghanistan is something so important
so morally uh non-negotiable
that you're just going to exclude and
silence all the people who
disagree with you to then refer back to
the french revolution
could we have had progress toward
democracy in the french revolution
without liquidating the aristocracy
without demolishing the catholic church
and you know what if the answer is no
from the heart of broken communities who
demand change
to the violent activists raging in the
streets
to the nightly patrols with officers
risking
their lives while some people see law
and order
others see oppression and tyranny i mean
really
people like to disrespect my crew but
the fact is that you know my name and i
don't know
you all right i have multiple things to
respond with that
so what i'm hearing from you is
reminiscent of cambodia a little bit
have they turned on anybody with an
education
and sort of victimized demonized people
with glasses anybody who seemed
educated or intelligent or professional
so let me answer that really briefly
sorry
i want to hear the rest of your question
but that's kind of a simple thing that
can be dressed up
so yes that did happen and the question
is who can you read who will give you an
honest description of it
right so i read the autobiography of
napoleon's younger brother
and this is just a couple months ago
this is quite recently read it
and it's a surreal book and it lies
about some things
i would generally say the second half of
the book is way more dishonest in the
first half
but it has these very touching um
first-person accounts
from this guy before he became famous
and powerful
in government himself but describing
a bunch of drunken sailors get off a
boat
and they're just looking around for like
he's like somebody with glasses
you know and they say him he's an
aristocrat
grab him string him up from the lamp
post
you know like literally you know
hangings like where
you know people who pretended or they
they declared themselves to represent
the ideals the revolution
were going around and beating people up
and killing people
um for yes
for reasons that would remind you of uh
the cambodian revolution
so many years later so yeah there were
some elements of that
and i would say for again this would be
a fantastic thing to make a mainstream
movie out of to try to really examine
and look at this
at the same time just to give a contrast
there were a lot of christian fanatics
there were christian fundamentalists at
one point napoleon's younger brother
the guy writing this book he himself was
taken hostage
by a group of christian fundamentalists
who from their perspective
the government had been taken over by
the antichrist
and they were also running around in the
street and killing people so you know
there were crazy people
on on more than one side um but yes
that's the nature of that violence is in
so many ways shockingly
modern um and to get descriptions of it
on that human scale
not a book that's making excuses for it
or something not something to
rationalize it
but just to hear someone describe like
this is what it was like being in this
village
at this time and these guys with swords
show up
and wow yeah it's a really it's a really
important element and i would say that
most histories actually
uh undersell it it's actually part of
the story that's left
largely untold this this kind of touches
on this topic that i
am interested in right now which is like
the idea of
some group of people being demonized
being
like where they're seen as the source of
the problem and
and to eliminate them or to you know put
them somewhere
is the solution and that's obviously
with cambodia
um the sort of deculacization probably
don't know there's this thing we've
talked about russian revolution before
where
these sort of semi-successful farmers
were designated as coolacks which is
similar to this aristocrat thing it's a
designation that's like you're the enemy
you're causing the problems
so all of these sort of successful
farmers were eliminated creating this
horrible famine
so all these scenarios that kind of like
it's something that i'm very interested
in historically
because it pops up a lot and it also
seems to be connected to communism a lot
um and there's a lot of talk
uh about from different sources
there's a lot of concern that things and
we talked about this the first time we
uh
we had a chat about the the concern that
seems to be out there of something like
this a brewing
currently now in america and perhaps
beyond i just mentioned also
this is fascinatingly modern uh still
today
you know it just resonates with things
going on in the internet in 2020
but you know the french revolution is
the origin
of the assumption or assertion that the
left wing
is somehow controlled by a jewish
conspiracy
and in reading this stuff it seems like
stuff made up on the internet today so
by the way disclaimer i'm ethnically
jewish i am not anti-semitic myself but
it's it's a fascinatingly like modern
thing
um this is partly because the very
beginning of the french revolution
before things got violent
one of the first pieces of legislation
they passed was kind of an equality
for jewish citizens of france act was
getting rid of old feudal laws
that really treated jewish people as not
even second-class citizens but this
whole different category of human being
within france
they decided to get rid of that and have
equality for jews and then you know
napoleon himself
personally for reasons i think are
unknown i think
he probably just knew a few jewish
people face to face he just
he regarded jewish people as normal
human beings and he likewise had this
kind of modernizing attitude
he just thought you know incorporate the
jewish population into france and treat
them give them equal citizenship and so
on that was his perspective
so but at that time right from the start
of the french revolution
as you can imagine there were a lot of
kind of conservative catholic people who
were against the revolution
and this was this was ammunition to them
was then to argue oh no
you know who's really behind this they
tell you this is about
scientific progress and human equality
but you know what human equality really
means
and this was the start of the you know a
set of conspiracy theories that goes on
to this day
um from one revolution to the next but
you know down to and including
uh the theory that the the russian
revolution and lenin himself were part
of a jewish conspiracy
this actually has this meme has gone on
and on from one from one generation to
the next
so so we'll go back to my question
though it's like i guess like what i'm
interested in
is we keep seeing this thing happen i
mean not that it's happened four billion
times but it's happened on a very large
scale multiple times
to really generalize it where some sort
of prob
general large problem is identified the
solution is
aimed at some group these are the bad
guys if we can just deal with these bad
guys the solution is solved
and then that just leads to that doesn't
actually solve anything it leads to
violence and horror and
widespread destruction and so forth and
so
i'm wondering it's like if this keeps
kind of happening in different ways
i don't know of a case where it was
intervened unless you can tell me was
there is there a case where it was kind
of a brewing and then something happened
and stifled it before it really got too
far yeah i think actually even the
french revolution is is an example of
that
because what happens is that napoleon uh
ends he ends the revolution basically he
subverts the revolution
so yeah no i think i think even the
french revolution is
is an example of that where it didn't it
didn't go all the way
um once napoleon takes over he gives
power back to the catholic church
which i personally regret and resent
he gives all the aristocrats who've run
away or gone into hiding
the right to come back to france and
guarantees their safety so he ends the
persecution of
of the aristocrats um so no i mean
i would say that the standard reading is
that the revolution was followed by a
counter-revolution of sorts
um but that counter-revolution
incorporated some of the elements some
of the progress
of the earlier phase of the revolution
so no i would definitely say that that
the french revolution was something that
was kind of halted
halfway and then things kind of
it's not that things go back to normal i
mean you can never go all the way back
you know you can never go back to the
dark ages
but um you then have this period of kind
of glorified military dictatorship
and france slinks back towards a
royalist
system yeah sometimes overtly royalists
sometimes covertly
but with some of those elements of
parliamentary democracy you know
remaining
so what do you think so for people that
are let's say there's people that are
interested in progress interested in
activism
interested in pushing things in a
certain direction
change maybe radical change what do you
think like people
could or should learn from these
revolutions that go to i mean it seems
like the thing that happens is
there's a good cause or at least the
intention of a good cause
but then the perceived solution to that
is actually not good and it's almost
like the intent is
trying to get somewhere good but then it
gets distorted and turns into horror
so like what's the lesson to learn like
how do how do people like do
what do you what do you think we should
learn from these these horrors in
history where rev
the revolution is attempted and leads to
something worse than it was there before
how do we do progress without it going
into these insane
overbearing scenarios i think you know
one way to state the problem is
how do you make rapid progress without
killing everyone who disagrees with you
yeah i think the temptation the left
wing has been struggling with for all
these years
including cambodia and including many
other cases they say okay well we'll
take over the government take over the
military and then
we're so certain of this route to
progress we're so certain of what we
have to do
steps one two and three that we'll
proceed with that and we won't allow
anyone to debate it or dissent
or report the problems with like report
just what's going wrong
like hey you reformed agriculture but
guess what you know
we're actually growing one-tenth as much
food as we did before
this kind of thing you know things that
may not be ideological problems
without snuffing out dissent and debate
um how do you make progress at all and
that's a very different question
in canada than it is in afghanistan
you know i want afghanistan to make
progress too but do you just say i mean
look let's be blunt a significant
percentage of the
afghan people still support the taliban
a significant percentage of the afghan
people don't support the taliban
but will support conservative muslim
groups
within politics that from my perspective
are only
10 percent different or 20 different
from the taliban right
like so are you going to
say that the progress and modernization
of afghanistan
is something so important so
morally uh non-negotiable
that you're just going to exclude and
silence all the people who
disagree with you now when it comes to
hygiene we do that
right we don't really allow debate about
drinking water about vaccines
thus there's a lot of you know vaccine
controversy on the internet
the last gasp of people who refuse to
participate in that you know there are
some
categories of political discourse where
we think that the consequences are so
high and the nature of the
certainty we have in the political
policy is you know
such that we say okay we're just going
to extinguish this debate we're not
going to allow people to debate
uh matters of hygiene and vaccination
and what have you
obviously the year 2020 is an especially
interesting year to be having that that
side of the discussion
um you know so to to then refer back to
the french revolution
could we have had progress toward
democracy
in the french revolution without
liquidating
the aristocracy without demolishing
the catholic church and
you know what if the answer is no what
if the truth is
that just as there had to be a war with
the taliban
what if there had to be a war with the
catholic church in france at that time
what if there was no other way
to make progress i don't like that
answer you know i don't like it
i'd rather i'd rather believe hey we can
all be like ancient athens
and meet at the penins and talk about
you know just have democratic debates
and freedom of speech and so on
but uh you know again uh to leap forward
to a more extreme example like world war
ii
there are some political debates that
are resolved through through violence
and violence only
so i think those are the the terrifying
and really meaningful questions you
you get into of course with that having
been said as you probably know
like i'm an advocate for veganism i
don't advocate for violence
and veganism at all not even the most
minor forms of violence i don't even
think breaking and entering and these
kinds of
these kinds of crimes are acceptable in
the name of veganism so i'm not someone
who's
uh who easily or lustily rushes to that
conclusion
but yeah i think um both answers both
answers are kind of terrifying because
if you if you embrace the opposite if
you really believe
that people like napoleon could have
been in parliament with
could have sat down on the same table
with and could have negotiated with
a royalist catholic traditional
right-wingers
and you know maybe the the fringes of
the left-wing jacobins
um one of the more memorable groups was
called the conspiracy of equals
people who were kind of proto-socialists
um looking for
for you know equality and redistributing
land to the poor and this kind of thing
um could all those people have come
together in a parliament and debated and
you know i i'd love to believe that
but of course maybe it's just not true
maybe those people were all killing each
other
for a reason like maybe the reason they
couldn't talk to each other was because
they were murdering each other in the
streets
and maybe sadly they were murdering each
other in the streets for a reason
so yeah there were a lot of really
sobering uh you know reconsiderations of
history
that i think can only lead to a more
mature appreciation
of the situation we're in now where
among other things
we can debate what the future ought to
be on youtube okay so
i'm moving on directly to your second
question then and marxism is a good
segue
so if you ask the question what went
wrong with the french revolution
we can really briefly contrast mark what
marx has to say to what i have to say
what marx and engels had to say is that
the french revolution failed because it
wasn't violent enough
it's mind-blowing but the profound
insight of karl marx and frederick
angles was that um the french revolution
should have massacred
more aristocrats they they interpret it
as if the real point was to massacre
the enemies of the revolution the
aristocratic class they should have gone
further
and they're opposed to what they call
the thermadorian reaction
not worth explaining this bizarre term
but they they're against the
moderating tendency that came into the
french revolution later
you know we say moderate basically meant
the government of france put their foot
down and said hey we're not going to
stab people in the street
we're not going to decapitate
aristocrats just because they're
aristocrats this is crazy
we're going to have law and order we're
going to try to be a normal government
and there's a very interesting question
of what did normal mean
their main model for a normal democracy
was england
and england was the hated enemy of
france but nevertheless
england was the only the only sense of a
normal democracy they had to imitate
england still had a king at that time of
course but they also had a parliament
they had some elements
of of popular democracy okay so what
marx and engels have to say about this
is surreal uh what do i have to say
about it
you know i feel like the tragedy of the
french revolution
is that it was a government composed of
notables and um
we still have this word in english today
but you may have never heard it in 10
years
what does it mean to be a notable it
would be like if today
um you said okay let's get rid of the
problem we've got and let's call for an
assembly of notables
and some of those people were famous
actors and some of them were
famous authors and they're just they're
celebrities
they're people who've become celebrities
one way or another and at that time in
france some of them were they were truly
brilliant
mathematicians truly brilliant scient
scientists like condorcet they were
people who were brilliant and
distinguished in many fields
but not politics and for me
i mean it's very interesting and very
heartbreaking to look at the
the personal and political careers of
those people because i really feel i've
got
that one talent that one area of
knowledge or expertise that they lack
you know who was napoleon or who was
condorcet
who were any of these people you know
they may have been great scientists
you know napoleon came out of a
background in the sciences within the
military
you know not worth digressing to explain
none of these were people who understood
democracy or
yeah i i there's to me one of the
fundamental tragedies is the tragedy of
the
notables of bringing together you know
government by celebrities and they
called it democracy
in many obvious ways what they had was
not a democracy
and those seem to have been people who
were incredibly poorly equipped
uh to deal with to deal with the
challenge of making that transition from
from feudalism to something more like a
modern democratic system of government